While the Israel Defense Forces say
that they are currently conducting
what they're calling a large scale
strike on terror targets
belonging to Hamas in Gaza,
that is, the top US diplomat is in Israel.
And the aircraft carrier
Gerald Ford has now moved into
the region as Israeli forces are mass
along the border.
With Gaza.
And there's so many questions
now happening of what comes next.
And the real question is how could the
next phase of this conflict unfold?
I want to bring in CNN military analyst
and retired Air Force Colonel
Cedric Leighton.
Also, actor James Clapper is also back.
He's a retired Air Force
lieutenant general, Colonel Leighton,
let's begin with you because
I try to understand, what do we know
about where the Israeli troops are moving
and then what might be coming?
Laura, that's a great question.
Tonight,
we have about 300,000 Israeli reservists
that are actually deployed on the border.
And so where are they actually well,
this is probably
a pretty good indication
right around all of these areas.
Right here
is where you will find Israeli troops
concentrated
and what are they concentrating with?
Well, equipment like these tanks right
here, they have tanks, armored personnel
carriers and other equipment that they can
potentially use to go into Gaza.
And that, I think, is going to make
a big difference in what they could
potentially do with some kind of ground
incursion on their part
It's hard for most people to imagine
just how densely populated Gaza is.
I mean, just we've heard about it.
We've been hearing about comparisons
that are drawn.
Tell me about the impact of that
on the next phase of a potential ground
incursion.
Yeah, that's a very interesting area
as well, Laura, because the most densely
populated
part of Gaza is the city of Gaza itself.
So that's this part right here that has
over 25,000 people per square mile.
Other areas like North Gaza, Darryl
Paula Khan Yunis, which is a major refugee
camp,
and Rafah, have less population densities,
but still everything in Gaza is basically
with little bit of an exception.
10,000 people or more per square mile.
So you think of a lot of people
that are packed into a very small area.
And just by comparison, there are places
that have higher population density
per square mile around the world,
but Gaza has more populations density
per square mile, about 21,000 people
per square mile in the urban areas
compared to Tel Aviv, Los Angeles
or here in the Washington, D.C.
area.
Wow. When you look at that comparison,
it really drives home the point of just
how densely populated and also
what would take place
if you had troops moving into those areas.
This is civilians we're talking about
in those areas in particular.
And so the US has moved
assets into the region.
What role could US firepower play,
if any, going forward?
Well, there are a lot of things
that we would have to contend with here,
and one of them are the dense streets.
So you look at how narrow things are.
This is what General Clapper
and I would call battle damage assessment.
Perfect video for that.
You see what damage has been done here.
But look how cavernous all of this is.
Look at all the different buildings
and look at how difficult it would be
to maneuver something through each
and every one of these streets.
So a lot of things
that would be coming into the area
include deliveries of munitions like you
see here from this Israeli cargo jet.
You have the USS Gerald
R Ford with its aircraft
is 70 to 90 aircraft depending on
how they did the carrier battle group.
And you've got them
coming into the eastern Mediterranean,
along with Air Force F-35s and F-15s,
as well as A-10s.
All of those play a huge part
in putting the U.S.
presence in this area and making sure that
this conflict doesn't go
any further than that.
It really has already.
Colonel Leighton, that's so important
to think about and just seeing all that,
Director Clapper, I want to ask you
about what we've been seeing from
Colonel Leighton,
because that population density,
there are hostages likely in Gaza.
You don't know where they are.
You see what is ahead and trying
to move ground troops into that area.
What strikes you as the most difficult
aspect of trying to get people out?
Well, a very compressed geography,
very crowded, urban, urbanized
terrain.
Urban terrain.
And so you wonder how, given
that sort of situation,
how they're going to move all that
heavy equipment, those tanks down these
very narrow streets that are in the Gaza.
So the question that comes to my mind
is what rules of engagement
is the Israeli Ministry of Defense
and the IDF chief
instructing,
providing to these the troops?
How exactly do they conduct themselves
if and when they actually enter enter
into the Gaza?
They've got so
many things to consider here.
A very
difficult terrain to start within operate
equipment, even in a passive environment,
which are benign environment,
which this is not.
They've got to contend with booby traps,
IEDs, snipers,
and plus the presence of a very dense
civilian population.
And also to to be
considered
are the location of the hostages
probably dispersed widely,
probably underground.
So what I wonder
about is, you know, the operations order
that is being issued
to or will be
issued to the Israeli attacking force
and what the rules of engagement are on
how they are to conduct those operations.
Mindful of all these factors,
there's so much to consider
and we're going to continue to unpack.
Colonel DeLay,
and thank you so much to Clapper.